RESEARCH

A Cornell study (Okeke et al., 2018\) found that social media usage was reduced by a persistent and minor vibration whenever the study participant exceeded their set social media use time. Nudge theory from behavioral economics suggests that minor prompts to alter a behavior can be effective at instilling short-term, or even long-term, behavioral change (Thaler & Sunstein, 2008). On the other hand, a form of operant conditioning called negative reinforcement involves the reinforcement of a desired voluntary behavior as a result of the removal of an unpleasant stimulus whenever the desired behavior is performed (Skinner, 1938; Staddon & Cerutti, 2003). A minor vibration whenever a participant exceeded their set social media usage was an effective intervention because it subtly prompted participants to leave the social media app through the vibration medium, and then rewarded them by removing the slightly unpleasant sensation of their phone continuously vibrating.

Digital activities can often include social media usage and other forms of mildly rewarding behavior that users can find unproductive or even detrimental to their wellbeing. These activities often encourage their presence in a person’s digital life through positive reinforcement mechanisms (Alter, 2017; Lin et al., 2015). Positive reinforcement uses desirable stimuli to reinforce a behavior (Skinner, 1938; Staddon & Cerutti, 2003). A way to counteract this positive reinforcement inherent to these activities is to use negative reinforcement, an unenjoyable stimulus that only goes away when the correct behavior occurs.

There are many ways to condition a behavioral change, however punishments often created short-lived changes (Skinner, 1963). Negative reinforcement encourages long-term change by providing feedback that is tolerable, though ultimately unpleasant and therefore encourages a person to avoid that behavior overtime. The same principle that encourages people to buckle up can be used to help them create all kinds of behaviors.  
